README.md, before:

# Raytracer

A high-performance raytracer written in Rust that renders 3D scenes defined in YAML files. Supports basic shapes, materials, .obj models, and animations. The project aims to follow test-driven development and clean code principles to ensure maintainability, reliability, and readability.

## Features

- YAML scene definition with handy built-in constants like `PI`

- Render high-quality images and animations
- Support for .obj 3D models
- Material properties including reflection and refraction
- Animation support
- Multi-threaded rendering
- Bounding Volume Hierarchies (BVH) for fast ray intersection tests
- Anti-aliasing through super sampling

## Sample Renders

| Description          | Image                                                              |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Cover image          | ![Cover image](samples/renders/cover.png)                          |
| Rotating dragon      | ![Rotating dragon](samples/renders/rotating_dragon.webp)           |
| Animated lens        | ![Animated lens](samples/renders/csg.webp)                         |
| Animated refractions | ![Animated refractions](samples/renders/animated_refractions.webp) |
| Refraction example   | ![Refraction chapter](samples/renders/refractions.png)             |
| Cubes scene          | ![Cubes chapter](samples/renders/cubes.png)                        |
| Dragon models        | ![Dragons](samples/renders/dragons.png)                            |

## Installation

1. Install [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install).

2. Clone and build the project:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/karolzwolak/raytracer.git
cd raytracer
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

### Basic Commands

Render a single image:

```bash
cargo run -r -- samples/scenes/dragon.yml image
```

Render an animation:

```bash
cargo run -r -- samples/animations/sphere.yml animate -d 2
```

### General usage

```
Simple raytracer that renders yaml scenes. Supports basic shapes and materials and .obj models. Can render single images and animations

Usage: raytracer [OPTIONS] <SCENE_FILE> <COMMAND>

Commands:
  image    Render a single image
  animate  Render an animation. Use `animate` field on an object to add animation to it
  help     Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)

Arguments:
  <SCENE_FILE>  The scene file to render

Options:
      --help
          Print help information
  -d, --output-dir <OUTPUT_DIR>
          The output directory of the rendered image. The output file will have following path: `<output_dir>/<scene_filename>.<image_format>`. This cannot be used with `--output-file`. The directory will be created if it does not exist
  -o, --output-file <OUTPUT_FILE>
          The output path of the rendered image. This cannot be used with `--output-dir`
  -w, --width <WIDTH>
          Width (in pixels) of the output image.
          Overrides the one in the scene file. If not specified anywhere, defaults to 800
  -h, --height <HEIGHT>
          Height (in pixels) of the output image.
          Overrides the one in the scene file. If not specified anywhere, defaults to 800
      --fov <FOV>
          Field of view of the camera in radians. Overrides the one in the scene file. If not specified anywhere, defaults to π/3
      --depth <DEPTH>
          Maximum number of times a ray can bounce (change direction). Direction change occurs when a ray hits a reflective or refractive surface. Overrides the one in the scene file
  -s, --supersampling-level <SUPERSAMPLING_LEVEL>
          Controls how many rays are shot per pixel. In other words, the quality of the anti-aliasing (supersampling). Overrides the one in the scene file
```

### Rendering images

```
Render a single image
Usage: raytracer <SCENE_FILE> image [OPTIONS]
Options:
  -f, --format <FORMAT>  The format of the output image [default: png] [possible values: ppm, png]
  -h, --help             Print help
```

### Rendering animations

```
Render an animation. Use `animate` field on an object to add animation to it
Usage: raytracer <SCENE_FILE> animate [OPTIONS] --duration-sec <DURATION_SEC>
Options:
  -f, --format <FORMAT>              The format of the output video [default: mp4] [possible values: gif, mp4, webp]
  -d, --duration-sec <DURATION_SEC>  The duration of the output video in seconds
      --fps <FPS>                    Frames per second of the output video. Note that not all formats support all framerates. Use lower framerates when rendering to gif (about 30) [default: 60]
  -h, --help                         Print help
```

## Scene File Format

Scenes are defined in YAML format with support for reusable components through defines. The project includes example scenes in [scenes/](scenes/).

### Basic Structure

A scene file typically contains:

- Camera definition
- Light sources
- Objects with materials and transformations
- Optional scene settings (supersampling, recursion depth)

Example:

```yaml
- add: scene
  max-reflective-depth: 5
  supersampling-level: 2

- add: light
  intensity: WHITE
  at: [-10, 10, -10]

- add: SCENE_CAMERA
  from: [0, 1.5, -5]
  to: [0, 1, 0]
  up: [0, 1, 0]
  fov: FRAC_PI_3

- add: sphere
  material:
    color: BLUE
    diffuse: 0.7
    specular: 0.3
  transform:
    - [scale-uniform, 0.33]
    - [translate, -1.5, 0.33, -0.75]
```

### Defines

Reusable components can be defined and referenced using the `define` keyword. You can define:

1. **Colors**:

```yaml
- define: my-red
  value: [1, 0.2, 0.2]
```

2. **Numbers** (including mathematical constants):

```yaml
- define: my-scale
  value: 2.5
```

3. **Materials**:

```yaml
- define: shiny-metal
  value:
    ambient: 0.1
    diffuse: 0.6
    specular: 0.9
    shininess: 300
```

4. **Complete Objects**:

```yaml
- define: my-sphere
  value:
    add: sphere
    material: shiny-metal
    transform:
      - [scale, 2, 2, 2]
```

5. **Transformations**:

```yaml
- define: spin-and-move
  value:
    - [rotate-y, 0.5]
    - [translate, 1, 0, 0]
```

Defines can extend other defines:

```yaml
- define: base-material
  value:
    ambient: 0.5
    diffuse: 1

- define: red-material
  extend: base-material
  value:
    color: [1, 0, 0]
```

Once defined, you can reference these components anywhere in your scene:

```yaml
- add: my-sphere
  transform:
    - spin-and-move
```

### Built-in Defines

The raytracer provides several predefined constants and materials:

#### Mathematical Constants

- `PI`, `2_PI`
- `FRAC_PI_2`, `FRAC_PI_3`, `FRAC_PI_4`, `FRAC_PI_6`
- `FRAC_1_SQRT_2`

#### Colors

- `WHITE`, `BLACK`
- `RED`, `GREEN`, `BLUE`

#### Materials

- `GLASS_MATERIAL`
- `MIRROR_MATERIAL`
- `AIR_MATERIAL`

#### Scene Components

- `SCENE_LIGHT`
- `SCENE_CAMERA`

Example usage:

```yaml
- add: cube
  material: GLASS_MATERIAL
  transform:
    - [rotate-x, FRAC_PI_4]
```

### Notable Examples

- [Rotating dragon animation](samples/animations/rotating_dragon.yml)
- [Glass sphere scene](samples/scenes/glass_sphere.yml)
- [Refraction demo](samples/scenes/refractions.yml)

## Configuration

Configuration options can be set through:

1. Command line arguments (overrides all other options)
2. Scene YAML file

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

Please ensure your code follows Rust best practices and includes appropriate tests.

Commit message:

feat: --duration-cycle animate flag
Animation duration now can be specified in terms of the animation cycle.
Animation cycle is the time it takes for the animation to loop.
Duration is no longer required to be specified, it defaults to 1 cycle.

README.md, after:

# Raytracer

A high-performance raytracer written in Rust that renders 3D scenes defined in YAML files. Supports basic shapes, materials, .obj models, and animations. The project aims to follow test-driven development and clean code principles to ensure maintainability, reliability, and readability.

## Features

- YAML scene definition with handy built-in constants like `PI`

- Render high-quality images and animations
- Support for .obj 3D models
- Material properties including reflection and refraction
- Animation support
- Multi-threaded rendering
- Bounding Volume Hierarchies (BVH) for fast ray intersection tests
- Anti-aliasing through super sampling

## Sample Renders

| Description          | Image                                                              |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Cover image          | ![Cover image](samples/renders/cover.png)                          |
| Rotating dragon      | ![Rotating dragon](samples/renders/rotating_dragon.webp)           |
| Animated lens        | ![Animated lens](samples/renders/csg.webp)                         |
| Animated refractions | ![Animated refractions](samples/renders/animated_refractions.webp) |
| Refraction example   | ![Refraction chapter](samples/renders/refractions.png)             |
| Cubes scene          | ![Cubes chapter](samples/renders/cubes.png)                        |
| Dragon models        | ![Dragons](samples/renders/dragons.png)                            |

## Installation

1. Install [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install).

2. Clone and build the project:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/karolzwolak/raytracer.git
cd raytracer
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

### Basic Commands

Render a single image:

```bash
cargo run -r -- samples/scenes/dragon.yml image
```

Render an animation:

```bash
cargo run -r -- samples/animations/sphere.yml animate
```

### General usage

```
Simple raytracer that renders yaml scenes. Supports basic shapes and materials and .obj models. Can render single images and animations

Usage: raytracer [OPTIONS] <SCENE_FILE> <COMMAND>

Commands:
  image    Render a single image
  animate  Render an animation. Use `animate` field on an object to add animation to it
  help     Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)

Arguments:
  <SCENE_FILE>  The scene file to render

Options:
      --help
          Print help information
  -d, --output-dir <OUTPUT_DIR>
          The output directory of the rendered image. The output file will have following path: `<output_dir>/<scene_filename>.<image_format>`. This cannot be used with `--output-file`. The directory will be created if it does not exist
  -o, --output-file <OUTPUT_FILE>
          The output path of the rendered image. This cannot be used with `--output-dir`
  -w, --width <WIDTH>
          Width (in pixels) of the output image.
          Overrides the one in the scene file. If not specified anywhere, defaults to 800
  -h, --height <HEIGHT>
          Height (in pixels) of the output image.
          Overrides the one in the scene file. If not specified anywhere, defaults to 800
      --fov <FOV>
          Field of view of the camera in radians. Overrides the one in the scene file. If not specified anywhere, defaults to π/3
      --depth <DEPTH>
          Maximum number of times a ray can bounce (change direction). Direction change occurs when a ray hits a reflective or refractive surface. Overrides the one in the scene file
  -s, --supersampling-level <SUPERSAMPLING_LEVEL>
          Controls how many rays are shot per pixel. In other words, the quality of the anti-aliasing (supersampling). Overrides the one in the scene file
```

### Rendering images

```
Render a single image
Usage: raytracer <SCENE_FILE> image [OPTIONS]
Options:
  -f, --format <FORMAT>  The format of the output image [default: png] [possible values: ppm, png]
  -h, --help             Print help
```

### Rendering animations

```
Render an animation. Use `animate` field on an object to add animation to it

Usage: raytracer <SCENE_FILE> animate [OPTIONS]

Options:
  -f, --format <FORMAT>
          The format of the output video [default: mp4] [possible values: gif, mp4, webp]
  -s, --duration-sec <DURATION_SEC>
          The duration of the output video in seconds
  -c, --duration-cycle <DURATION_CYCLE>
          The duration of the output video in animation cycles. Animation cycle is the time it takes for the animation to loop [default: 1]
      --fps <FPS>
          Frames per second of the output video. Note that not all formats support all framerates. Use lower framerates when rendering to gif (about 30)
```

## Scene File Format

Scenes are defined in YAML format with support for reusable components through defines. The project includes example scenes in [scenes/](scenes/).

### Basic Structure

A scene file typically contains:

- Camera definition
- Light sources
- Objects with materials and transformations
- Optional scene settings (supersampling, recursion depth)

Example:

```yaml
- add: scene
  max-reflective-depth: 5
  supersampling-level: 2

- add: light
  intensity: WHITE
  at: [-10, 10, -10]

- add: SCENE_CAMERA
  from: [0, 1.5, -5]
  to: [0, 1, 0]
  up: [0, 1, 0]
  fov: FRAC_PI_3

- add: sphere
  material:
    color: BLUE
    diffuse: 0.7
    specular: 0.3
  transform:
    - [scale-uniform, 0.33]
    - [translate, -1.5, 0.33, -0.75]
```

### Defines

Reusable components can be defined and referenced using the `define` keyword. You can define:

1. **Colors**:

```yaml
- define: my-red
  value: [1, 0.2, 0.2]
```

2. **Numbers** (including mathematical constants):

```yaml
- define: my-scale
  value: 2.5
```

3. **Materials**:

```yaml
- define: shiny-metal
  value:
    ambient: 0.1
    diffuse: 0.6
    specular: 0.9
    shininess: 300
```

4. **Complete Objects**:

```yaml
- define: my-sphere
  value:
    add: sphere
    material: shiny-metal
    transform:
      - [scale, 2, 2, 2]
```

5. **Transformations**:

```yaml
- define: spin-and-move
  value:
    - [rotate-y, 0.5]
    - [translate, 1, 0, 0]
```

Defines can extend other defines:

```yaml
- define: base-material
  value:
    ambient: 0.5
    diffuse: 1

- define: red-material
  extend: base-material
  value:
    color: [1, 0, 0]
```

Once defined, you can reference these components anywhere in your scene:

```yaml
- add: my-sphere
  transform:
    - spin-and-move
```

### Built-in Defines

The raytracer provides several predefined constants and materials:

#### Mathematical Constants

- `PI`, `2_PI`
- `FRAC_PI_2`, `FRAC_PI_3`, `FRAC_PI_4`, `FRAC_PI_6`
- `FRAC_1_SQRT_2`

#### Colors

- `WHITE`, `BLACK`
- `RED`, `GREEN`, `BLUE`

#### Materials

- `GLASS_MATERIAL`
- `MIRROR_MATERIAL`
- `AIR_MATERIAL`

#### Scene Components

- `SCENE_LIGHT`
- `SCENE_CAMERA`

Example usage:

```yaml
- add: cube
  material: GLASS_MATERIAL
  transform:
    - [rotate-x, FRAC_PI_4]
```

### Notable Examples

- [Rotating dragon animation](samples/animations/rotating_dragon.yml)
- [Glass sphere scene](samples/scenes/glass_sphere.yml)
- [Refraction demo](samples/scenes/refractions.yml)

## Configuration

Configuration options can be set through:

1. Command line arguments (overrides all other options)
2. Scene YAML file

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

Please ensure your code follows Rust best practices and includes appropriate tests.
